After deciding not to allow LO to be vaccinated with the MMR vaccine, I took LO to a private medical practice for his single measles vacation today.  The clinic is owned by an ex NHS consultant paediatrician, is full of toys and very very relaxed.  They made us both feel very at ease, showed me the vials before they were used and then used what they told me were special paediatric needles so small that the idea is the child feels only pressure, not pain.
 I can only go on previous experience - that being one very distressed baby, and a health visitor herding us in like cattle to stick very thick needles into LOs thigh, leaving red angry marks and an obviously sore leg.  Not this time, LO was playing with some toys in the consulting room when everything was being explained to me, when the time came I simply picked him up, pulled down his trousers, he wasn't held down or forced down as he has been previously, he had the jab (without it being corkscrewed in like usual), stayed nice and calm then went back to play with his toys.  No fear, no stress, no tears!!
 There's no way we're going back to the health visitor for ANY of LOs jabs now.  There's no need for the upset it causes each time.  People have told me I'm mad to pay for single vaccines when i can get it combined on the NHS, but today i spent the best money I've ever spent. LOs comfort is worth more than money, and im so pleased I made the decision I did 
It really does make a difference doesn't it?! I think I was branded a trouble maker by our HV when I asked her questions she really couldn't be arsed with answering the first time we went.  I know they're busy but on 'vaccination day' at our surgery, the babies are lined up outside and rushed through.  No care, no time given, they all scream without fail and the who,e experience is horrible for all involved.  Regardless of my stance on the MMR, it was so nice and refreshing to have someone genuinely seem to care for the well being of your child.  Such a pity I had to pay to get it when all LOs deserve that level of care as standard
 but what is absolutely certain, and written on the 'side effects' section of the pamphlet you get with the combined MMR, is that it can cause auto-immune disorders in people.  so if you or your family are susceptible to them, its best to avoid
I've pulled apart the research into MMR and the autism link at least 5 times. Each time I've found more and more evidence against Wakefields study. 
 I can vouch for some of his other statements regarding auto-immune disorders and certain bowl disorders. But it's a slim vouch. 
 The problem people have is, we're so 'up for' blaming others for every little thing. I specialised in austism with community care and so many of the mums I've worked with blame the vaccine BUT Austic traits are first noticable at the age or the vaccine and slightly afterwards, I worked closely with a family who had two sons with autism, one born in '94 and one born in '00. The older child had the MMR vaccine and they were told (as to research at the time) the vaccine had caused the austism. The younger child DID NOT, yet has Asperges. The were then told the youngests asperges was caused by the MMR vaccine. But he'd never had it. His mother had refused it. 
 Theres more links to Autism and Asperges being a genetic link and usually if you watch a family with one person who is 'affected' enough to be diagnosed, the rest of the family will show autistic traits. Not enough for most to notice, but those who generally dislike social functions, keep a small network of friends but aren't particulary close to any one friend, unusual confidence with strangers (usually when talking over one subject, 'nervous' jibberish as it can seem).
 I made it my business to know this study inside out and have followed it religiously. New clients come onto my lists wanting to know why and if it was something they did. Short answer is no. Theres no blame, you could blame yourself for letting your child have the vaccine, but you could for not! If the study have a strong enough backbone, don't you think the combined vaccine would have been pulled YEARS ago? Wakefield was pushing the idea onto others way back in the early '90's and if the risks outweighed the benefits, it would have been pulled by either the NHS or the government. Let's face it, the government have to pay more towards a SEN child's education then that of a mainstream, they don't like having to take money from pointless budgets and giving it to causes that need it. 
 End of the day it is the parents choice over the vaccine, but either way don't feel guilty about it or anything else you choose your child to have or do! The only opinions that truely matter are that of your own, seriously though, any doubt and speak to your GP, HV or a specialist in the subject (or if you can get your hands on an unbiased reading source). It's a shame alot of leaflets are designed by nature to express the authors beliefs and persuade you to their way of thinking, even the ones you pick up in the doctors clinics are the same, it's hard to truely write from an unbiased point of view. 
